There are 2 types of enzymes that are assayed for: (1) hydrolytic enzymes and (2) oxidative enzymes. Hydrolytic enzyme activities are assayed using fluorimetric methods and oxidative enzyme activities are assayed using absorbance after reacting with pyrogallol and hydrogen peroxide. Methods, theory, and calculations follow from German et al 2011, cited below.

## Hydrolytic enzymes (black plates, fluorescence)
Activities of hydrolytic enzymes are measured via fluorescence in black 96-well plates that only allow light to enter and leave through the opening of each well, as opposed to clear 96-well plates that allow light to pass through all directions. According to the plate layout for black plates, each column is denoted by a number and only assays for a single enzyme (please refer to the ***2020-11-24-Plate-Layouts.xlsx*** spreadsheet for the plate layout). There are 7 hydrolytic enzymes that are assayed for, and they are assayed for in columns 1-7 where each column contains only a single substrate and so only assays for a single enzyme, and substrate concentrations decrease as you go down each column. Columns 1-7 in buffer plates (more on buffer vs sample plates below) serve as substrate controls (more on controls below). Columns 8-10 serve other control purposes and contain standard solutions and water. Each substrate contains a group that, once reacted, will cause the well it is in to fluoresce, and it is this fluorescence that I use to measure an enzyme's activity. Columns 8 & 9, which contain standard solutions, will also fluoresce.

Each assay round has 2 types of plates: (1) a buffer plate, which will be used for control purposes, and (2) at least 1 sample plate. As stated above, there are 7 substrates in each assay round. Each assay round also uses 2 standards in columns 8 & 9 with each standard having a column to itself. Water will be in column 10. Both plate types will contain all of the above (substrates in columns 1-7, standards in columns 8 & 9, and water in column 10); however, while a sample plate will be plated with a homogenized leaf litter sample while a buffer plate will be plated with be plated with a 6.0 pH 25 mM maleate buffer. In each assay round, a serial dilution is carried out for each of the 7 substrates where they are sequentially diluted by half. Each assay round uses the same dilution. Leaf litter from different plots are homogenized and then plated with the same number of sample plates as the number of plots. That means that leaf litter from a single plot is homogenized and plated into one plate with substrates in columns 1-7 and standard solutions in columns 8 & 9, and water in column 10; leaf litter from another plot is homogenized and then plated into another plate with substrates in columns 1-7 and standard solutions in columns 8 & 9, and water in column 10, and so on, so forth.

There are 3 controls: (1) substrate control, (2) quench control, and (3) homogenate control. These substrate controls are figured into enzyme activity calculations using the equations in the paper cited below. Substrates will fluoresce by themselves, and the substrate control controls for that; if not controlled for, then the substrate control will artificially increase fluorescence, making analysts think that the activity of an enzyme is higher than it actually is. For each assay round, the fluorescence values of columns 1-7 of the BUFFER plate will be used as the substrate control for all samples in that round. The quench control controls for any “quenching”, “masking”, or “dimming” caused by the suspended particles in the homogenized leaf litter blocking some of the fluorescence; if not controlled for, it can artificially reduce fluorescence and, as an extension, cause an underestimation of enzyme activity. Each sample plate will have its own quench control values in the fluorescence values in the plate’s own columns 8 & 9. In each sample plate, columns 1-5 and 7 will use the standard MUB (column 9) as their quench control while column 6 will use the standard AMC (column 8) as its quench control. The homogenate control controls for any fluorescence that the homogenate might give off; if not controlled for, fluorescence from the homogenate can cause an overestimation of enzyme activity. Each sample plate will have its own homogenate control in its column 10; column 10 of the buffer plate in each assay round will not be used, as these values are essentially meaningless. Columns 8-9 of the buffer plate in each assay round will be used to aid in quench control for that round.

## Oxidative enzymes (clear plates, absorbance)
This assay type assays for 2 enzymes: polyphenol oxidase (PPO) and peroxidase (PER) using absorbance readings in clear 96-well plates with pyrogallol as the only substrate for PPO while pyrogallol and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) serve as substrates for peroxidase. Each sample gets its own plate with a single enzyme being assayed twice per plate. In other words, there are 2 replicates of a single sample on a single plate. Before plating, the homogenate is filtered. Wells that assay for PER does so by having the same contents as PPO wells but with 10 microliters of 0.3% H2O2 added to each PER well, which results in activity of both PPO and PER. Thus, "PER" wells actually assay for both PPO and PER. To calculate the activities of PER, the activities of both PPO and PER are calculated first and are then subtracted by the activities of PPO wells. As another note: any mentions of the homogenate in this section afterwards assumes that the homogenate had been filtered.

The following are the contents of each well:
Wells associated with PPO: pyrogallol/water (125 microliters) + homogenate/buffer (125 microliters)
Wells associated with PER: pyrogallol/water (125 microliters) + homogenate/buffer (125 microliters) + 0.3% H2O2 (10 microliters)

There are 2 types of controls: substrate control and homogenate control. The substrate control controls for any absorbance from the substrate to ensure that the absorbance from the substrate won't be misconstrued for the absorbance of reaction products. The homogenate control serves the same function for the homogenate: it controls for any absorbance from the homogenate so that absorbance from the homogenate won't be misconstrued for absorbance from reaction products. Each replicate has its own columns to be used as a homogenate control, with the first replicate using column 8 as a homogenate control for PPO and column 7 as a homogenate control for PER while the second replicate uses column 12 as a homogenate control for PPO and column 11 as a homogenate control for PER. However, both replicates share the same columns for substrate control: both of them use column 1 to control for the absorbance of pyrogallol (in assaying for only PPO) and column 2 as a substrate control for PER.

Each replicate assays for PPO and PER separately and, therefore, have different assay columns from each other. The first replicate uses column 5 to assay for PPO and column 6 to assay for PER while the second replicate uses column 9 to assay for PPO and column 10 to assay for PER. Now, both forms of control and the assay wells also includes the absorbance of the buffer. The absorbance of the buffer is removed by subtracting the readings of these wells from column 4 in wells that assay for PPO and column 3 in wells that assay for PER.

Formulas follow German et al. Notably, formulas for colorimetric assays in this study include an extinction coefficient. The extinction coefficient used in these calculations is 4.2 micromol^-1, which is obtained from Bach et al.

## Works cited
German, Donovan P. et al. “Optimization of hydrolytic and oxidative enzyme methods for ecosystem studies.” *Soil Biology & Biogeochemistry*, vol. 43, no. 7, 2011, pp. 1387-1397.

Bach, Christopher E. et al. "Measuring phenol oxidase and peroxidase activities with pyrogallol, L-DOPA, and ABTS: Effect of assay conditions and soil type." *Soil Biology & Biogeochemistry*, vol. 64, 2013, pp. 183-191.