# On normalizing enzyme activity
After producing these 2 figures, I've concluded that when I'm comparing k2, concentration of enzymes, and Km, I should first normalize all 3 of them before conducting any statistical comparisons. Normalizing, in this case, means dividing these 3 quantities by the litter mass.

## Normalizing 1 sample
Let's examine the figure where I normalize only 1 sample. I set the same axis limits for all the plots in this figure. The top middle plot is the one where I normalized enzyme activity and plotted that versus substrate concentration. The top right plot is the one where I normalized k2 and used this normalized k2 to calculate new enzyme activity. As you can see, these plots look identical in shape. So, you can conclude that by plotting normalized enzyme activity vs substrate concentration, that has the effect of normalizing k2 first and then using this normalized k2 to calculate enzyme activity. While k2 normally has units of s^-1 or other inverse units of time, by normalizing k2, this new k2 has units of s^-1 g^-1. So the "k2" in the top middle and top right plots is ***normalized*** k2. The substrate and enzyme concentrations and the Michaelis-Menten constant are not normalized.

Now, onto the plots at the bottom of the same figure. Bottom left (Kiara reference, anyone?) plot is made by normalizing both enzyme activity and substrate concentration and then plotting that against each other. Bottom middle plot is made by normalizing (1) substrate concentrations, (2) enzyme concentration, and (3) the Michaelis-Menten constant and then using these normalized values to calculate normalized enzyme activity. k2 is not normalized. As you can see, both of these 2 plots are identical. By plotting normalizing both enzyme activity and substrate concentrations and plotting them against each other, you have the effect of normalizing the above 3 values and using them to calculate the normalized enzyme activity.

Now, I would like to note that whether I normalize (1) k2 or (2) substrate & enzyme concentrations and the Michaelis-Menten constant, I still produce the same normalized enzyme activity rates. To see if this is true, I plotted normalized enzyme activity calculated by normalizing k2 against normalized enzyme activity calculated by normalizing (1) substrate concentrations, (2) enzyme concentration, and (3) the Michaelis-Menten constant in the bottom right plot. As you can see it's a perfect correlation. They are identical. However, normalizing one or the other results in different substrate concentrations, which would lengthen or shorten either of the other curves.

## Normalizing 3 samples
Now, let's examine the figure where I normalize 3 samples. Each row in the figure represents a different sample, with sample 1 (top row) having the highest litter mass and sample 3 (bottom row) having the lowest litter mass. The left column are plots of their total enzyme activity; the middle column consist of plots of their normalized enzyme activity vs substrate concentration; the right column consists of plots of normalized enzyme activity vs normalized substrate concentrations. I made it so that all 3 samples have identical **total** enzyme activity, but because their litter masses are different, they will end up with different **normalized** enzyme activity. Because their **total** enzyme activities are identical, they all have identical (1) k2, (2) enzyme concentration, and (3) Michaelis-Menten constants. Conversely, because their **normalized** enzyme activities are different, their normalized versions of (1) k2, (2) enzyme concentrations, and (3) Michaelis-Menten constants will be different between samples.

As stated in the above section, by plotting normalized enzyme activity vs substrate concentration, you have the effect of first normalizing k2 and then using that normalized k2 to calculate enzyme activity. If you look in the middle column, notice how, as you go down the column, normalized enzyme activities tend to increase. That is because litter mass decreases as you go down the column. So, you can conclude that **normalized** k2 tends to increase as you go down. The formulas in German et al 2011 give you normalized enzyme activities, so if you use these formulas, plot them against substrate concentrations, and perform a nonlinear regression, the k2 you're getting out is **normalized** k2. Note: substrate and enzyme concentrations and Michaelis-Menten constant are not normalized in these plots, so these values are similar across samples.

Now, onto the right column. As stated in the above section, by normalizing both enzyme activity and substrate concentrations and plotting them against each other, you have the effect of normalizing (1) substrate concentrations, (2) enzyme concentration, and (3) the Michaelis-Menten constant and then using these normalized values to calculate normalized enzyme activity. If you only look at the left column, you would think that all 3 samples have the same enzyme concentration and Km. However, once you normalized enzyme concentration & Km and use them (along with normalized substrate concentrations) to calculate and plot normalized enzyme activity, you would see that they all have very different normalized enzyme activities, stemming from different normalized enzyme concentration & Km. Normalizing them reveal differences that you would not see if you don't normalize. If you use formulas from German et al 2011 to calculate normalized enzyme activity and then plot that against substrate concentration, you will produce un-normalized Km and enzyme concentrations.

## Normalizing 1 litter sample across 3 different litter masses
To further investigate whether or not normalizing enzyme parameters is necessary prior to statistical comparisons, I decided to write a section on normalizingExamples.py that assays a single litter sample 3 times. The litter sample has a constant ratio of enzymes to litter mass. In other words, it's normalized enzyme concentration is constant regardless of litter mass. I pretended to assay this litter 3 times, each time with a different litter mass. I wanted to see if normalizing enzyme parameters is necessary to avoid differences that may be caused by differing litter masses. I'm only assaying a single litter sample, I'm just doing it 3 times with 3 different litter masses, so their parameters must stay the same. I'm trying to see whether normalizing any parameters will keep them the same across different assays of the same sample.

I've found that the normalized enzyme concentrations and Km will remain identical across all 3 assays while non-normalized k2 will remain identical across all assays.

## Discussion

### Thoughts on second analysis
Aight, now that I've described the figure where I normalized 3 samples, let's discuss it a bit more. I used 3 different hypothetical litter samples, and all of them have the same (non-normalized) k2, Km, and enzyme concentration. However, all of them have different litter masses. So what differentiates all these litter samples from each other? Each of them require a different amount of litter to reach the same enzyme concentration. So, they all have different normalized enzyme concentrations. That's about the only difference.

If you normalize k2 and Km, you would see that their normalized k2 & Km are different from each other. However, are they actually different from each other, or are these differences actually caused by different normalized enzyme concentrations?

After thinking about this for a little bit, I think that it's weird to normalize k2 & Km before doing statistical comparisons. After all, as the left column of the 3-samples figure shows, they all have the same non-normalized k2 & Km. They just require a different amount of litter to achieve the same enzyme concentration. So any differences are due to normalized enzyme concentrations. Non-normalized k2 & Km between all these litter samples are identical, so the kinetic properties are actually identical. Just that it takes different amounts of litter to reach the same amount of enzymes. So I should be making statistical comparisons between **non-normalized** k2 & Km and **normalized** enzyme concentrations.


### Thoughts on third analysis
Although now I'm starting to change my mind on that, though. Let's take a look at the top row of the figure where I normalize 1 hypothetical litter sample. Let's look at the top middle and top right plots. What's gonna happen to **normalized** enzyme activity if I continuously increase the sample's litter mass? In other words, if I perform a real lab assay on this enzyme for this sample, what's gonna happen to normalized enzyme activity? Well, as I said before, by plotting normalized enzyme activity vs substrate concentration (top middle plot) and performing nonlinear regression on that, the k2 I'm getting out is normalized k2 (top right plot). So, k2 would increase, but so would litter mass, so normalized k2 would stay the same. However, enzyme concentrations would increase, and because the enzyme concentration I'm getting from doing nonlinear regression on the top middle plot is not normalized, the value of enzyme concentration in the ECA equation would increase, which should drive an increase in normalized enzyme activity, actually. This provides an argument for the normalizing of k2, since by normalizing k2 and seeing that there is an increase in enzyme activity even though normalized k2 is the same, I can properly attribute this increase in activity to an increase in the total concentration of enzyme. Now, what about Km? Now, it's really hard for me to make an argument for or against the normalization of Km, but I'll just say that, I should normalize Km, too. Normalizing k2 allows me to see that any increases in enzyme activity are due to increases in actual enzyme concentrations. And normalizing enzyme concentrations prior to statistical comparisons allow me to more clearly see differences in actual enzyme production. So if normalizing k2 and enzyme concentration allows me to see these things, then I can gain some insight by normalizing Km, too.


### Thoughts on fourth analysis
This is written after I wrote the section in normalizingExamples.py where I test whether normalization is necessary by simulating 3 assays of a single litter sample using different litter masses. The end goal here is to see whether normalizing or not normalizing will result in similar parameters across all 3 assays. All 3 assays must result in similar parameters, since they originate from the same sample.

According to my results, since k2 stays the same across all assays only if it's not normalized, I conclude that k2 must not be normalized. Enzyme concentrations and Km, on the other hand, stays the same across all samples only if they are normalized, so they must be normalized to control for any effects on magnitude by litter mass.


### Thoughts on normalizing Michaelis-Menten parameters
So I came to the conclusion that I should do nonlinear regression of normalized enzyme activity vs non-normalized substrate concentration. I conducted nonlinear regression against 3 different sets of fake data that all originated from the same normalized enzyme activity. I multiplied the normalized enzyme activity by the litter mass associated with each set of data, and conducted nonlinear regression between each set of data and the same set of substrate concentrations. Doing so yield me non-normalized Vmax & Km parameters. I then divided these parameters by their litter masses. I've found that, if I don't divide the parameters by their litter masses, then their Km will be similar while their Vmax will be different, while if I divide the parameters by their litter masses, their Vmax will be the same while their Km will be different. So, I need to keep Vmax and Km values the same regardless of litter masses. To do so, I'm going to plot normalized enzyme activity against substrate concentration from now on and conduct nonlinear regression after that, which would yield me a Vmax that's divided by the litter mass and a Km that's not divided by litter mass. Doing so would give me a Vmax & Km that's the same regardless of litter mass.